--- Page 1 ---
Beginning With the End in Mind
‐ the Fundamentals of Recreational Diving
Jesper Berglund


--- Page 2 ---
Beginning With the End in Mind –t h e Fundamentals of Recreational Diving
Copyright  © 2009
Produced by Global Underwater Explorers, Sweden, Stockholm, 2008
First edition, version 1.0
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means – electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or otherwise – without written 
permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review with the appropriate 
credit. For information about this book, contact: 
Global Underwater Explorers
15 S. Main St., High Springs, 
Florida 32643
United States
.
Disclaimer
Global Underwater Explorers, its Board of Director, Instruc tors or appointees and the author(s) of this workbook shall
not be liable for any injury (fatal or otherwise), loss or dama ge sustained, either directly or indirectly, through the
use of this workbook including loss or d amage resulting from negligence.
Diving is an experimental activity and no guarantee can made as to the accuracy of any of the material contained
here. It is therefore up to the individual to exercise caution when using any of the information in this workbook. This
workbook may only be used in conjunction with formal dive r training from a qualified GUE Instructor. However, the
participation of each diver in any diving activity shall be strictly voluntarily and the doiver shall assume all risks,
consequences and potential liability for his/her own actions or the negligence of any other party. No responsibility
for any accident or damage caused from the use of this material can be placed with the author(s), editors or
producers, the instructor, the providers of the materia l or Global Underwater Explorers. Use At Your Own Risk.
Telephone: 001 386 454 08 20
Fax: 001 386 454 08 15
E‐mail: info@gue.com
www.gue.com


--- Page 3 ---
Guidelines to use this workbook
Beginning With the End in Mind
‐ the Fundamentals of Recreational Diving
Jesper Berglund


--- Page 4 ---
Author:
Jesper Berglund
Contributing Author:
Liam Allen
Graphic Design and Artwork:
Helene Hagerman
Producer:
Jarrod Jablonski
Editing and Content:
Dr. David Doolette
Dawn Kernagis
Derk Remmers
Ed Gabe
George Boloukus
Helene Hagerman
Jarrod Jablonski
Karim Hamza
Laura Auito
Marc Hall
Maren Izigkeit
Mario Arena
Nick Shoeffler
Richard Lundgren
Richard Walker
Sarah K. Wears‐Garcia
Susan Bird
A special thank you to:
Jarrod Jablonski
Richard Lundgren
Helene Hagerman
Liam Allen
Dr. David Doolette
David and Tina Rhea
Dawn Kernagis
Richard Walker
Claudio Provenzani
Elena Romano
Derk Remmers
Maren Izigkeit
Laura Auito
Daniel Hansson
Niklas Hagen for his continuous support
Photo Credits:
Ali Taylor
Anatoly Styf
Andrew Beasley
Anna Hunter
Barry Smith
Bartek Cyperling
Bill Chilton
Bryce Thompson
Claudio Provenzani
Daniel Hansson
Daniel Riordan
David Guglielmo
David Rhea
Derk Remmers
Eraxion
Fleur Suijten
Gareth Lock
George Boloukus
Griet Schneider
Helene Hagerman
Henrik Cederblad
Ilker Izmir
J Daley
Jarrod Jablonski
Jesper Berglund
Kirti Chetty
Laura Mae Luett
Liam Allen
Linda Haglund
LotusHead
Lukasz Grzy
Marta Domingo
MCEP
Micke Tilja
Neil Gould
Pontus Edenberg
Richard Lundgren
Robert Lee
Rodolfo Clix
Sara Sandberg
Satendra Mhatre
Simon Tullstedt
Sonya Tittle
Steve Woods
Susan Bird
Twmedia
Uli Kunz
Viktors Kozers
Wojtek Filip
WKPP
Front Cover Photo Credits:
David Rhea and Linda Haglund
Chapter Front Cover Photos:
Ch 1 – Claudio  Provenzani
Ch 2  – Adrienne Muscat
Ch 3  – Helene Hagerman
Ch 4  –D a n i e l Hansson
Ch 5  –D a n i e l Riordan
Ch 6  – Andreas Brodow
CH 7 – Henrik Cederblad
CH 8– J e s p e r  Berglund
Ch 9  –S a m Radion
Ch 10 – Kirti Chetty
Acknowledgements


--- Page 5 ---
“Beginning With the End in Mind – The Fundamentals of Recreational Diving” is written
primarily for the purpose of being a student workbook for the GUE Recreational Diver
Level 1 course. However, this book may also be used by students training on other levels
within the GUE course curriculum. “Beginning With the End in Mind” is divided into 10
chapters following the structure of the instructor ‐held lectures of the GUE Recreational
Diver level 1 course. The workbook is a resource for self ‐study – a vital component of the
academic learning process of the GUE Recreational Diver Level 1 class and provides
elaborated information on the subjects presented orally by your GUE instructor.
GUE Recreational Diver Level 1 students are asked to study this workbook carefully and
use the learning aides and supplementary r esources included or referred to in this
workbook to maximize learning efficiency . GUE would like to emphasize that you as a
Learning Aides – “Quick Reviews” and “Knowledge assessment”
In each chapter of this workbook you will find learning aides t hat are designed to facilitate easy tracking of individual
knowledge development. These learning aides include “Q uick Reviews” and “Knowledge Assessments”. The “Quick
Reviews” are short quizzes through which students quick ly can gauge their level of understanding for what they have
just read and will appear as boxes in the page margin of this workbook. At the end of each chapter you will find
“Knowledge Assessments” which are in the form of longer quizzes. The Knowledge Assessments needs to be
completed and handed in to your GUE instructor as they re present an important instrument through which the
instructor may determine the need for prescriptive teach ing on specific subjects. Further to this, the Knowledge
Assessments will help in preparing the GUE Recre ational Diver Level 1 student for the final exam.
“Go deeper” – Encyclopedia and Supplemental Reading
For even more in ‐depth information than is included in the workbo ok chapters, students will sometimes find “Go
deeper links” at the bottom of some pages in the workb ook. These go deeper links refer to exact pages and
paragraphs in supplemental reading resources such as:
− The “Submerged” Encyclopedia
‘Submerged – Mastering the Art and Science of Sport Di ving’; This elaborate diving encyclopedia is made
available as a part of your study material. The Submerged encyclopedia is divided into 12 chapters and is an
excellent resource for in‐depth information
− Doing it Right – the Fundamentals of Better Diving
This book is dedicated to give in ‐depth information on the holistic GUE philosophy a.k.a Doing it Right.
− The GUE website
This Online resource provides detailed information on the GUE organization, our mission and efficacy.
− Primer material
For further reading your instructor may present you with so called primer material. These primers are
available in the form of PDF articles that elaborates on subjects such as e.g. the use of Nitrox, fitness etc.
Abbreviation and Glossary
At the end of this workbook a list of abbreviations is incl uded to enable quick explanations of all diving related
acronyms that are used throughout this workbook. These a cronyms will in all cases be spelled out and explained the
first time they are introduced in the text but will later appear only in their acronym ‐form. Further to this, a glossary
have been included at the end to help explain a wide range of expressions and terms used in this book.
Guidelines to Use This Book
students may ALWAYS ask the GUE instructor any question a t any time during your training. Your GUE instructor is
there exclusively for your learning and we strongly advice you to always seek help or directions that may increase
your understanding.


--- Page 6 ---
Guidelines to use this workbook


--- Page 7 ---
I never wanted to start diving in the first place. In fact, I refused at first. I was almost completely lacking knowledge
and curiosity of what lay under the sea surface, so my prospects of becoming an avid diver must have seemed poor
at first. When a friend of mine literally dragged me into the sport (and physically to my first scuba class), I did not
have any clue as to what to expect.
Yet, my first encounter with the sub aqua tic world would for ever change my life . The complex and overwhelmingly
beautiful underwater landscape, the ability to move effortlessly in three dimensions, the tranquility and the
immense adventure of it all completely took me by surpris e. When I resurfaced again after my first visit to the wild ,
and at the same time serene aquatic realm, I remember asking my diving instructor if it could really be possible that
he experienced this every day?
I still recall him smiling back at me in affirmation, and a t that very moment I suddenly knew what I should do in life.
Experience it again – the adventure, the tranquility and the serenity. Every day.
Many years down the line, as a diving professional having taught many divers on various levels in many different
parts of the world, it remains one of my greatest passions in life to give people the same experience I had during my
first scuba class.
To give someone the knowledge and techniques necessary to explore the oceans unknown and unearthly beauty of
the underwater world is always a great responsibility and h onor. Likewise, being an explorer of the aquatic realm
(and a guest in an environment to which mankind can only venture with the aid of life ‐supporting equipment) is a
great liability towards our natural world and coming generations.
Conserving our planet’s aquatic resources is of paramo unt importance as decades of increasingly more aggressive
human impact not only starts becoming evident, but is proving to be devastating. Consequently, divers have a great
responsibility not only to inspire others, but also to take active measures to protect and conserve the aquatic
element, which we are blessed to explore through scuba diving.
I hope that this book will inspire you to share the passion of Global Underwater Explorers – the world’s premier
organization for exploration, research and education in all things aquatic. Regardless if you are already a certified
diver or if GUE Recreational Diver Level 1 is your first step, I would like to welcome you to a life ‐time of adventures
through scuba diving – one of the most versatile sports requi ring dedication, practice, quality instruction and time to
master.
There are many people to whom I will be eternally grateful and without whom this book would never have been
written. Out of all of these amazing individuals, GUE Pre sident Jarrod Jablonski and Training Director Richard
Lundgren must be mentioned first since their faith in me was a key factor for production to even begin. Helene
Hagerman, who has tirelessly put up with me, designed and co ‐produced along the way. Liam Allen for being a true
brother in arms, my family and friends for their support.
Last, I would like to dedicate this book to my beloved friend Todd Törnquist –
the man who literary dragged me to the water that day, and without whom I 
probably still wouldn't have experienced the great adventure that you are all 
about to begin.
Welcome to the aquatic realm and Global Underwater Explorers,
Jesper Berglund
Training Director of Recreational Diving
Global Underwater Explorers
Preface


--- Page 8 ---
Guidelines to use this workbook


--- Page 9 ---
Guidelines to use this workbook
“We forget that the water cycle and the life cycle are one.”
‐Jacques Cousteau
