            Revisiting the Hazards of Smoking and Diving


                   Doing It Wrong:
                 Smoking and Diving
                                      By Heather Hamza, CRNA, M.S.




                                                                                                                                  K. Hamza


     The CDC reports that more deaths are caused each year by tobacco use than by all deaths from
       HIV, illegal drug use, alcohol use, motor vehicle injuries, suicides, and murders combined.


Introduction



O
         ne of the things that impressed me the most in my GUE       am referring to their overt references to the importance of good
         training is the “evidence-based practice” approach that     physical fitness and their anti-smoking stance. Although the
         they take. Everything that I learned had a reason behind    two are closely related, the purpose of this writing is to focus
it. GUE applies sound physiologic rationales and mechanical          on smoking.
principles in all of their methods, which is fantastic for someone
                                                                     The very first publication of Quest has a wonderful article on
like me who tends to question everything.
                                                                     the dangers of mixing smoking and diving (Ranz, 1999). It is
Another aspect of GUE that I genuinely appreciate is that they       definitely time to revisit this topic. I would also encourage the
choose safety over hurting someone’s feelings. In particular, I      readers to look at Ranz’s article, as it is an excellent review.



Quest										                                                                                              Vol. 12, No. 3        25
                                                                                              In addition to lugging around heavy
                                                                                              equipment, swimming in strong current,
                                                                                              surge, or flow, and, perhaps, performing
                                                                                              physically demanding work underwater,
                                                                                              several studies have shown that regular
                                                                                              physical activity may protect against DCS.
                                                                                              This is believed to be attributed to reduced
                                                                                              bubble formation associated with exercise
                                                                                              (Pontier et al., 2009).

                                                                                              According to Cresp et al. (2000), current
                                                                                              medical screening is not efficacious
                                                                                              at determining which individuals are
                                                                                              medically unfit for diving. The authors
                                                                                              also advocate the promotion of continued
                                                                                              health surveillance in divers, seeing as most
                                                                                              certifying agencies are not engaging in this
                                                                                              practice. Although some organizations do
                                                                                              require “dive physicals,” these are largely
                                                                                              self-reporting instruments.

                                                                                              Commercial divers routinely undergo
                                                                                              more rigorous medical screening. In Japan,
                                                                                              they have a health examination every six
                                                                                              months, including spirometry, which is the
                                                                                              most common form of pulmonary function
                                                                                              tests (PFTs) (Suzuki, 1997). Suzuki also
                                                                                              conducted a study to compare the PFTs in
                                                                                              smoking versus non-smoking commercial
                                                                                              divers, which will be subsequently discussed.

                                                                                              Experimentation: Hyperbaric O2
                                                                                              Therapy

      With all the adverse effects of cigarette smoking clearly                                The heart and lungs are truly one unit—one
                                                                                               cannot function without the other. In order
       documented, there can no longer be any question that
                                                                                               for our bodies to efficaciously eliminate N2
      smoking is a high-risk activity. (Courtesy of Dan Piraro)                                and CO2, as well as deliver life-sustaining
                                                                                               O2, our cardiovascular system must be in
How Smoking Affects Divers                                                                     tip-top shape. Smoking has direct negative
                                                                         impacts on the very mechanisms that we depend on not only for
A basic review of the scientific literature using key words such
                                                                         maintaining life at the surface, but for surviving in the hyperbaric
as “smoking and diving” and “smoking and hyperbaric” yielded
                                                                         environment.
three overall categories: physical fitness/determination of fitness
for diving; retrospective analyses of diving accidents, namely           There is an abundance of studies that describe hyperbaric
DCI/DCS; and lastly, experimentation. Experiments included               oxygen therapy and wound healing (i.e., diabetic ulcers, bone
pulmonary function tests (PFTs) in smokers and non-smokers               fractures, spine fusions, reconstructive tissue flaps), comparing
and physiologic functioning/wound healing in hyperbaric                  smokers versus non-smokers. While the details are beyond the
chambers. The negative consequences of smoking are described             scope of this article, their findings are predictable. Smokers
in all of the literature, with a special focus on these effects in the   consistently exhibit delayed healing due to their compromised
hyperbaric environment. These effects are summarized in the              microvasculature (the smallest blood vessels). Smoking not only
table at the end of the article and will be described throughout         damages the lungs but the cardiovascular system as well. Some
the rest of the article.                                                 classic predicted pathology includes damaged endothelium
                                                                         (lining) of microvasculature and larger vessels and platelet
Diving Fitness
                                                                         aggregation (clumping), as well as acute changes in heart rate and
The need for divers to be in good physical condition and to have         systemic vascular resistance (vasoconstriction). These effects are
solid exercise tolerance is already well established. What seems to      summarized in the table at the end of the article.
be lacking is a more thorough physical exam that includes more
                                                                         A recent study by Hart and Strauss (2010) analyzed gas tensions
than a swim test, as well as ongoing maintenance of physical
                                                                         in skeletal muscle and subcutaneous tissues in smokers and non-
health.

26        Quest										                                                                                                 Vol. 12, No. 3
smokers, comparing them at room air and under
hyperbaric O2 conditions (HBO2). This article also
includes an excellent overview and explanation of
how smoking affects gas exchange, and I highly
recommend reading it. The researchers’ most
relevant finding was the significant delay in N2
off-loading from skeletal muscle in the smoking
group when exposed to both protocols (room air
and HBO2). They concluded that this was due to
the chronic destruction of the microvasculature’s
epithelium (lining of the tiny blood vessels)
rather than the transient effects of nicotine. These
changes were already evident in young smokers in
their 30s.

Since this study protocol used a PO 2 of 2.0
(subjects at 2 ATA breathing pure O2 from a scuba
regulator), these findings cannot necessarily be
generalized to the typical hyperbaric conditions a
scuba diver is exposed to, for example, with a PO2
of 1.2. If anything, a study that mimics a scuba dive
would show even more detriment in the smoking
group. This is because HBO2 has been shown to
improve tissue oxygenation even with endothelial
damage. It would be fascinating to replicate this
study in a hyperbaric environment minus the
benefits of a 2.0 PO2.




                                                        Courtesy of K. Hamza
Pulmonary Function Tests
In short, PFTs (also called “spirometry”) are a
method of assessing a variety of lung volumes (i.e.,
flow over time). There are volumes and capacities,
with a capacity being the sum of one or more
volumes. Here is one example that you can try on
yourself; it is called functional residual capacity or        Tobacco advertising often trades on sexually charged
FRC. After a normal tidal exhalation, there is still
a lot of volume left in your lungs, but you would
                                                           images    to promote identification and sell its product. The
not be aware of this unless you “forced” it out.             sad irony, however, is that the end result of the activity
Take a normal breath, in then out. After you have                 of smoking is not what is represented in the ad.
exhaled normally, gently force yourself to exhale
every last drop of air. This “leftover” volume is
                                                                        She analyzed static lung volumes, dynamic lung volumes and
called the FRC, and it can be measured. Another measurement is
                                                                        flows, and DLco. Overall lung volumes were larger than those
the DLco, or diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide.
                                                                        seen in the general population. As to be expected, there was a
Typically, obstructive lung disease (as seen with smoking) will
                                                                        decrease in DLco seen with smoking, suggesting emphysema
cause a decrease in the lung’s diffusing capacity. Please see Figure
                                                                        (which the author reports is a contraindication for diving). It is
A for classic flow-volume loops that clearly depict the differences
                                                                        worth mentioning that a drop in DLco is seen with normal aging,
between normal and pathological patterns.
                                                                        even in non-smokers. So, these seemingly healthy young divers
Experimentation: Lung Function                                          were actually performing with aging lung function.

The following two studies analyze PFTs in commercial divers,                   Sekulic and Tocilj’s study (2006) looked at PFTs in thirty-two
comparing smokers versus non-smokers. These findings might                     male and twenty-seven female military divers in Croatia. The
not necessarily be able to be generalized to the “normal” diving               only statistically significant difference that they found between
population since the majority of participants of the studies were              smokers and non-smokers was in the relative inspiratory vital
young and in otherwise good health.                                            capacity. They also concluded that smoking negatively affects
                                                                               pulmonary function in military divers, mainly with respect to
Suzuki’s study (1997) used seventy-one male participants                       large airway function. The authors speculate that regular physical
who were divers with the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force                     fitness training (such as what military divers must endure) can
(JMSDF); forty-six were smokers and twenty-five non-smokers.                   decrease the harmful effects of smoking, which would explain


Quest										                                                                                                        Vol. 12, No. 3        27
the lack of more statistically significant differences between the        Wilmhurst and Bryson (2000) published a unique study
two groups.                                                               that analyzed one hundred consecutive divers who sustained
                                                                          neurological DCI and compared them to 123 historical “control”
Retrospective Analyses of Diving Accidents                                divers, whose dives were uneventful. Dr. Bryson regularly treats
                                                                          divers for DCI. The authors specifically looked at right-to-left
The next two papers were retrospective analyses of scuba diving
                                                                          shunts (also known as a patent foramen ovale or PFO), lung
accidents, including assessment of accident severity and possible
                                                                          disease, and provocative dive profiles. We will focus on the lung
contributing factors (i.e., diver characteristics). These articles also
                                                                          disease.
provide a thorough review of the physiologic mechanisms behind
the etiology of DCI.                                                      Not surprisingly, there were significantly more smokers in the
                                                                          cases who did not have predisposing factors and with short
An overview of DCI is relevant at this juncture, to demonstrate
                                                                          latencies than in the rest of the divers (five out of twelve versus
its relationship with smoking. First, every dive is a decompression
                                                                          twelve out of eighty-eight). The authors define latency as the
dive. Second, bubbles are commonly found in the venous
                                                                          interval between surfacing and the onset of the first neurological
circulation after diving but are usually asymptomatic because they
                                                                          symptom. Interestingly, their current practice is to carry out
are filtered by the pulmonary capillaries and are eliminated via the
                                                                          lung function tests in all cases of neurological decompression
alveoli. If ambient pressure is reduced below the partial pressure of
                                                                          illness, including spirometry, flow volume loops, chest X-ray,
the gas dissolved in the tissues, then bubbles can form and cause
                                                                          and sometimes a chest CT (computerized tomography), which
DCS. Obstructive lung disease with air trapping (commonly
                                                                          is more sensitive than a chest X-ray for detecting the presence
seen with smoking) or failure to fully exhale during ascent can
                                                                          of bullae (air-filled pockets due to alveolar damage). They also
cause pulmonary barotrauma, leading to bubbles invading the
                                                                          recommend a CT scan of the lungs if a diver wishes to resume
pulmonary veins to become arterial gas embolism (AGE).
                                                                          diving after an episode of neurological DCI starting on the ascent
                                                                          or soon after surfacing, when other tests are negative. The authors
                                                                          describe many individual case reports of neurological DCI, the
                                                                          role of lung disease, and the need for proper diagnostics. For
                                                                          example, there was a case of a diver who smoked a pack and a
                                                                          half of cigarettes a day, then had quit for two years. Immediately
                                                                          upon surfacing after a dive, he showed signs of neurological DCI.
                                                                          His entire work-up was negative, except his chest CT showed
                                                                          multiple bullae.

                                                                          Lastly, Buch et al. (2003) used data from the Divers Alert
                                                                          Network® (DAN) from 1989-1997, to retrospectively analyze a
                                                                          total of 4,350 cases of DCI. There were actually a total of 8,269
                                                                          cases; however only cases that had complete data were analyzed.
                                                                          Additionally, diving-related deaths were not included in the study.
                                                                          Data was not analyzed after 1997 because the following year the
                                                                          instrument was changed, allowing for free text and not a “check
                                                                          list” of symptoms. As we know, there are many contributing
                                                                          factors for DCI but this article specifically looked at smoking.

                                                                          In medical terminology, a “pack year” means that the individual
                                                                          has smoked a pack of cigarettes a day for a certain number of
                                                                          years. Therefore a “20-pack year smoker” is someone who has
                                                                          smoked a pack a day for 20 years. In this study, smoking history
                                                                          was quantified as heavy (>15 pack years), light (0-15 pack years),
                                                                          and never smoked. DCI symptoms were classified as severe
                                                                          (alteration in consciousness, balance or bladder/bowel control,
                                                                          motor weakness, visual symptoms, convulsions), moderate (other
                                                                          neurological symptoms), or mild (pain, skin, or nonspecific
                                                                          symptoms).

                                                                          The authors found that the heavy smokers were 1.88 times more
                                                                          likely to have DCS than divers who never smoked, and 1.56 times
                                                                          more likely than light smokers. They also found that any smoker
                                                                          was more likely to have severe versus moderate symptoms than
                                                                          in non-smokers. Although a cause-and-effect relationship is not
                                                                          established with this data, there is an undeniable correlation.
                Courtesy of Tony Gleeson                                  When categorized, the results clearly show that heavy smokers
                                                                          present the highest number of severe symptoms. The authors
                 (www.tonygleeson.com)
28        Quest										                                                                                                 Vol. 12, No. 3
conclude that smoking is a risk factor for
increased severity of symptoms.

Conclusions
It should be abundantly clear by now that
smoking and diving do not mix. There is
an impressive list of physiologic rationales,
as well as sound medical research to support
this statement. In addition to the obvious
damage that smoking does to the lungs and
conducting airways, there is a significant
amount of occult pathophysiology that
might not manifest until the least opportune
moment (i.e., after surfacing from a dive). I
am encouraging you to please not dive with
smokers; they are putting themselves and
their teammates at risk.

References
 Buch, D.A., El Moalem, H.,
 Dovenbarger, J.A., Uguccioni, D.M. &
 Moon, R.E. (2003). Cigarette smoking
 and decompression illness severity:
 A retrospective study in recreational
 divers. Aviation, Space & Environmental
 Medicine, 74(12), 1271- 1274.
 Cresp, R., Grove, C., Lalor, E., Valinsky,
 L. & Langton, P. (2000). Health status
 of recreational scuba divers in western
 Australia. South Pacific Underwater
 Medicine Society Journal, 30(4), 226-230.
 Hart, G.B. & Strauss, M.B. (2010).
 Effects of cigarette smoking on tissue gas
 exchange during hyperbaric episodes.
 Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society,
 37(2), 73-87.
 Pace, T., Mifsud, J., Cali-Corleo, R.,
 Fenech, A.G. & Ellul-Micallef, R. (2005).
 Medication, recreational drugs, and
 diving. Malta Medical Journal, 17(1),
 9-15.
                                                      Summary of deleterious effects of smoking and diving
 Pontier, J.M., Guerrero, F. & Castagna,
 O. (2009). Bubble formation and
 endothelial function before and after
 3 months of dive training. Aviation, Space & Environmental        Wilmhurst, P. & Bryson, P. (2000). Relationship between the
 Medicine, 80(1), 15-19.                                           clinical features of neurological decompression illness and its
                                                                   causes. Clinical Science, 99, 65-75.
 Ranz, A., (1999). The impacts of smoking on diving. Quest,
 1(1), 36-42.                                                      Wilmhurst, P., Davidson, C., O’Connell, G. & Byrne, C.
                                                                   (1994). Role of cardiorespiratory abnormalities, smoking
 Sekulic, D. & Tocili, J. (2006). Pulmonary function in military   and dive characteristics in the manifestations of neurological
 divers: Smoking habits and physical fitness training influence.   decompression illness. Clinical Science, 86(3), 297-303.
 Military Medicine, 171(11), 1071-1075.
 Suzuki, S. (1997). Diver’s lung function: Influence of smoking
 habit. Journal of Occupational Health, 39, 95-99.


Quest										                                                                                          Vol. 12, No. 3       29
