Equipment & Training
       Reach Back and Breathe
                                                   By Melissa Montilla




                                                                                                                                       D. Riordan


                     Cave divers need shoulder flexibility to reach and manipulate their valves;
                             exercise can be very effective to help improve their reach.




W
           hether they realize it or not, athletes constantly            at the side view. If there is an arch in the upper back, the angle
             experiment with balancing an optimal range of motion        is not 180 degrees, and the shoulder could use some opening.
             with strength and stability. Often, more emphasis is
                                                                         Shoulder mobility is necessary for far more than the ability to
placed on power, without appreciating the incredible benefits of
                                                                         reach. Sustaining mobility in the shoulders requires maintaining
flexibility. Because it requires participants to be able to reach back
                                                                         flexibility in the upper middle back, which, in addition to
and manipulate their valves, cave diving puts a unique emphasis
                                                                         being essential to optimal breathing, reduces headaches, neck
on a diver’s shoulder range of motion. The shoulder’s optimal
                                                                         tension, and, of course, injury to the shoulder joint. However,
range of motion is measured by the ability to rotate the arm 180
                                                                         the challenge is regularly making the time to work on mobility.
degrees. To test your own range of motion, try the following:
                                                                         For even the busiest of schedules, here is a ten minute practice
stand in front of a mirror and lift an arm straight up with the
                                                                         that can make a big difference.
upper arm hugging the ear and the elbow straight. Now look


4												                                                                                                                     Quest
                                                                M. Montilla


Lie on the floor on your back; your legs should be straight, ankles
hip width apart, and the outside edge of your feet perpendicular
to the ground. Take a deep breath and move your bottom back
ribs toward the floor while the lower back moves away from
the floor. Extend your arms straight up toward the ceiling and
broaden across the back between your shoulders. Move your arms
toward the floor on either side of your head without letting the
back of the ribcage move away from the floor. Move your arms
up and down dynamically, holding each position for about two
seconds. Repeat eight to ten times.




                                                                                                                                              M. Montilla


                                                                              Interlace your fingers and press your palms away from you so that
                                                                              your thumbs point straight to the floor. Then raise your arms up
                                                                              by your ears and press your palms, thumb side especially, toward
                                                                              the ceiling. Lift from the base of the shoulder blades so that you


                                                                M. Montilla
                                                                              move the bottom of your ribcage away from the top of your pelvis.
                                                                              Lift the back of your ribcage, and straighten your elbows. Allow
                                                                              your shoulders to slide up by your ears. Hold for at least thirty
                                                                              seconds, and then press firmly into the left foot as you arch over
                                                                              to the right. Hold there for another thirty seconds, and then
                                                                              come back up to center and straighten your elbows even more.
Standing, hold your arms out to the side in a "T" position for                Press firmly into your right foot as you arch over to the left. Keep
thirty to sixty seconds. Lift your sternum and lift the back of your          breathing into the back ribs for another thirty seconds, and then
rib cage. Really reach! Do at least twenty medium-sized (about                return to the center and release.
18 inch diameter) arm circles in each direction, making them as
even as possible. Try to move your arms without moving your                   There it is - ten minutes of practice to open the shoulders and
torso. If your torso is moving in response to the arm circles, make           reach back. Try it at least three times a week for three weeks. If
the circles smaller and work your way up.                                     you feel a difference, make it a part of your regular routine.




Vol. 14, No. 2										                                                                                                                            5
