                                      Guidelines to Make
                                   Exercise a Part of Daily Life

                  Incorporating
               Training into the Life
                  of a Busy Diver
                                                     By Errol Kalayci




                                                                                                                                       R. Kalayci


                            Errol riding a bike on a trainer during girls’ soccer practice.



Q
       uest (Vol. 13, No. 4) contained my article, “Swim-Bike-       Undoubtedly, many GUE divers lead very busy lives. Oftentimes,
        Run: Fun Ways to Prepare for Fundies,” which explained       they are managing the demands of a challenging career with
        how swimming, biking, or running can help divers             those of family and community while also trying to remain
prepare for Fundamentals by promoting fitness while doing            active divers. Too often, the time dedicated to fitness is sacrificed
exercise that directly relates to diving. This article was written   to make room for everything else, even though the importance
with the intention of explaining how fitness can be incorporated     of regular exercise to our health and diving is undeniable.
into daily life.                                                     Fitness, however, does not need to be sacrificed, nor should it


Quest										                                                                                                 Vol. 14, No. 1        33
                                                                                   Quantity of Exercise

                                                                                   Consistency is the secret to becoming more fit.
                                                                                   The key to building a healthy lifestyle and to
                                                                                   ensure that a person makes room for exercise
                                                                                   in their schedule is to incorporate it into their
                                                                                   weekly routine. Training should be a time a
                                                                                   person looks forward to—it is personal time.

                                                                                   The amount of time a person commits to fitness
                                                                                   should be the least amount of specific training
                                                                                   necessary to make gradual fitness improvements
                                                                                   at the right times. What this is will depend
                                                                                   on what a person’s goals are and what type of
                                                                                   cardiovascular workout they are committed
                                                                                   to. For example, running is a higher impact
                                                                                   sport than swimming or biking and burns more
                                                                                   calories. Beginners can tolerate longer bike or
                                                                                   swim sessions than they can running. As a general
                                                                                   rule, a half hour of running is equal to an hour
                                                                                   of biking or forty-five minutes of swimming. If a
                                                                                   person is looking simply to improve their health
                                                                                   and be fit for diving, ninety minutes of running
                                                                                   per week should be more than adequate to begin
                                                                                   with, broken up over the week. If a person opts
                                                                                   for swimming, then they should add forty-five
                                                                                   minutes per week; if biking, they should add
                                                                                   ninety minutes. Following this general rule will
                                                                                   yield the greatest fitness returns on time. At the
                                                                                   other end of the spectrum, for a competitive
                                                                                   Ironman, twelve to twenty-four hours a week
                                                                                   may be required for training and to improve just
                                                                                   a small percentage each year. For an average-sized
                                                                                   man, running ninety minutes per week may burn
                                                                                   over 1,500 calories. Since there are approximately
                                                                                   3,500 calories per pound, a side benefit is possible
                                                                                   weight loss of a pound every other week.

                                                                                   Once a person can comfortably exercise for ninety
                                                                                   minutes per week at a moderate level, they can
                                                                                   slowly increase the volume by no more than ten
     Running is an excellent way to exercise for individuals                       percent per week or two.
        with busy schedules. (Courtesy of Brightroom)
                                                                                   Frequency

                                                                                    Assuming the need to perform cardiovascular
be. With proper time management and planning, divers should         exercise for ninety minutes per week as outlined above, should
comfortably be able to incorporate fitness and diving into the      this exercise be done in one session, broken up into a daily
demands of their daily life.                                        session, or in some other way? Since moderation is vital for
                                                                    beginners and recovery critical for everyone, if running is one’s
Consistent training, not binge training, is the key to a healthy    cardiovascular training choice, the best approach would be to
lifestyle and gains in fitness. For beginners, exercise performed   divide the total amount into three thirty-minute sessions and
at low to moderate levels yields greater health benefits than       allow a day in between each session for recovery. Most typically
higher intensities. As in diving, exercise is frequency and         an individual would run Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, leaving
quantity dependent. Too much too fast spells disaster. And since    the weekend free for diving and family. Furthermore, thirty
adaptation and improvement can occur only during recovery,          minutes is an easy block of time to fit into anyone’s schedule.
recovery time is also vital.                                        Many people perform their exercise first thing in the morning
This article will focus on quantity and frequency of exercise and   before anything else can interfere. This a great way to ensure it
how a diver with a beginner’s level of fitness can incorporate it   gets done, gives a person energy throughout the day, and makes
into daily life.                                                    their metabolism more efficient by burning a larger amounts of


34       Quest										                                                                                            Vol. 14, No. 1
fat than would happen later in the day after they have eaten. It is    Some Last Thoughts
important however not to over-eat after a workout. A reasonable
amount of protein and some fruit would be ideal along with some        Before embarking on this exciting lifestyle change, I strongly urge
water or other fluids. Another approach is to fit cardiovascular       individuals to consult a doctor and have a physical. I also suggest
training in during lunch. Many professionals have replaced the         that after they begin training, individuals write their workouts
old two-martini lunch with the thirty-minute cardiovascular            into their weekly schedule and record their data post-workout.
training session. This can reasonably be done during lunch,            Doing so makes it more likely that they will execute their exercise
while having time to grab a quick shower and prepared bite to          plan and provides objective feedback of fitness improvement,
eat. If a person chooses lunchtime to exercise they should be          which over time is itself very rewarding. Finally, as long as one
mindful that work commitments may trump the time allotted              is not exhausted or dehydrated, studies have shown that diving
to exercise. Having said this, lunchtime training can be a great       after exercise is okay and potentially beneficial but exercising after
way to relieve workday stress. Yet another option is to exercise       diving is not a good idea.
after work. Personally, I find this the least attractive, as I may
                                                                       Conclusion
be tired or pressed for time given the hectic activity of the day.
In any case, any of these timeframes works; it is just critical to     In conclusion, consistent, frequent, moderate intensity training
formulate a plan and stick to it. A word of caution: cramming          is the key to becoming more fit. Over time, the training and
two sessions into the weekend may seem like a good idea, but           recovery cycle will produce amazing benefits for a person’s health,
there is not enough time for recovery—though one can certainly         and they will come to treasure their training sessions as a part of
do one session on a weekend. Finally, as your weekly volume of         their very essence. In my opinion, every diver must make time
exercise increases over time, individuals will want to add a fourth    for fitness and has no plausible reason not to do so.
day once their daily run session reaches the hour mark.

Intensity

These training sessions need to be undertaken sensibly. The
key is to get them in each week and to do so without going to
exhaustion or becoming too sore. If persons exercise to exhaustion
or become unreasonably sore, they are less likely to want to do the
next session and may risk injury. Over time, the body will adapt
as fitness improves and a person can tolerate more intensity or
more frequent sessions. For more targeted training, individuals
can purchase the least expensive heart-rate monitor they can
find at a sporting goods store and determine their training zones
with a knowledgeable athlete or coach. As a rule of thumb, in
the beginning a person should not exercise so intensely that
they cannot communicate with a few sentences (see RPE Scale).
Until one’s fitness improves, exercising more intensely will be
counterproductive. As time progresses in a session and fatigue sets
in, it may become harder to abide by this “rule.” If this occurs, it
is advisable to slow down or walk until exercise can be resumed
at an intensity where communication with a few sentences is
possible. Think of this as an analogue to a back gas break when
on oxygen. Therefore, a person should resume their effort as soon
as possible but leave the time running and include the slow period
into their run time. By being consistent with frequency, fitness
will improve and one will have to slow down or walk less and less.

Local Resources

As with diving—where new divers look for a GUE instructor or
an experienced diver to mentor them and a local community—so
it goes with exercise. Hiring a professional, properly licensed
coach is a great way to reduce the chance of injury, manage
time more efficiently, be held accountable, and have the greatest
return on workout time invested. Other choices include finding
a local running or triathlon club or joining a Master’s Swim
team. Running shoe shops, bike shops, and pools, as well as the
Internet, are likely to provide enough leads to help a person find
the help they could use.



Quest										                                                                                                   Vol. 14, No. 1         35
